.TH Orthograph 1 "2014"

.SH NAME
Orthograph - Orthology prediction using a Graph-based, Reciprocal Approach with Profile Hidden Markov models

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBorthograph-manager\fP [ OPTIONS ] [\fIFILE\fP]

\fBorthograph-analyzer\fP [ OPTIONS ]

\fBorthograph-reporter\fP [ OPTIONS ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Orthograph is a pipeline for orthology prediction in transcriptomic datasets. It uses profile hidden Markov models and BLAST to implement a search algorithm that maps transcripts to pre-defined orthologous groups using global best reciprocal hits.

.SH OPTIONS

All options can be specified in the configuration file or on the command line. See the section \fBCONFIGURATION FILE\fP for more information.

.TP
\fB--h\fP
Print a short usage message along with a list of options, the description of which is this manpage :-)

.TP
\fB--aaoutdir\fP DIR
set the output directory for amino acid sequences to DIR. Will be created if it does not exist.

.TP
\fB--alignment-program\fP PATH
set the alignment program. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'mafft-linsi --anysymbol'.

.TP
\fB--backup\fP
backup old output files before starting a new analysis. This is the default, disable it by saying \fB--nobackup\fP.

.TP
\fB--blast-evalue-threshold\fP X
set the e-value threshold for BLAST searches. Can be specified in a floating point or an exponential number. Defaults to 10e-5.

.TP
\fB--blast-max-hits\fP N
set the number of BLAST hits for each search. A lower number speeds up searches. Defaults to 100.

.TP
\fB--blast-program\fP PATH
set the BLAST program. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'blastp'.

.TP
\fB--blast-score-threshold\fP X
set the score threshold for BLAST searches. Defaults to 10.

.TP
\fB--blastoutdir\fP DIR
set the output directory for BLAST result files. Will be created if it does not exist.

.TP
\fB--clear-database\fP
clear the database of old results. This will give you a clean slate before a new analysis. Does not remove any ortholog sets. This is the default, disable it by saying \fB-noclear-database\fP.

.TP
\fB--clear-files\fP
clear old output files. This will remove old output files, including the search results. This will give you a clean start, but will cause everything to run again.

.TP
\fB--cog-list-file\fP FILE
specify a list file to filter COGs. If you are only interested in a few genes from your ortholog set, you can provide Orthograph with a list of ortholog IDs in a file. The IDs must be in a single line each, and there must be no empty lines in the file. 

.TP
\fB--concatenation-header-separator\fP S
set the header separator for concatenated sequences. Defaults to '&&', enclose it in quotes if it contains whitespace.

.TP
\fB-c\fP, \fB--configfile\fP FILE
specify the path to a configuration file, which will be read instead of the default. Defaults to 'orthograph.conf' in the installation directory.

.TP
\fB--continue\fP
continue a previously begun analysis. This will skip loading the transcriptomic data into the database and assumes that is there from an earlier run.

.TP
\fB--create\fP
create the database structure. Available for \fIorthograph-manager\fP.

.TP
\fB--database-backend\fP NAME
set the database backend to NAME. Must be 'sqlite' or 'mysql'. Defaults to 'sqlite'.

.TP
\fB--db-prefix\fP PREFIX
set the database table prefix to PREFIX. Defaults to 'orthograph'.

.TP
\fB-d\fP, \fB--debug\fP
turn on debug mode, including database queries and internal workings. This is only helpful if you want to find errors in the program. Be aware that the log files can become several gigabytes in size this way.

.TP
\fB--delete-ogs\fP FILE
delete the OGS in FILE from the database. You must specify the exact same data that you used to load the OGS into the database, otherwise sequences cannot be correlated.

.TP
\fB--delete-set\fP SET
delete the ortholog set SET from the database. Specify the name of the set.

.TP
\fB--destroy\fP
delete everything Orthograph from the database.

.TP
\fB--exonerate-program\fP PATH
set the Exonerate program. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'exonerate'.

.TP
\fB--extend-orf\fP
try to extend ORFs beyond the region that the reciprocal search determined as orthologous. Without this setting, the ORF can only get smaller if Exonerate trims the sequences.

.TP
\fB--fill-with-x\fP
when concatenating transcripts, fill the gap in amino acid sequences with 'X' characters and in nucleotide sequences with 'N' characters.

.TP
\fB--hamstr-compatible-output\fP
produce output in a HaMStR compatible format so that other scripts can parse it.

.TP
\fB--genetic-code\fP X
specify an alternative genetic code. The default (1) is the standard genetic code. See \fIhttp://dev.man-online.org/man1/exonerate/\fP and look for \fBTRANSLATION OPTIONS\fP for a complete list of supported codes. 

.TP
\fB--header-separator\fP S
set the header field separator for Fasta output files. Enclose in quotes if it contains (or is) whitespace. Defaults to '|'.

.TP
\fB-h\fP, \fB--help\fP
print a short synopsis and a list of options.

.TP
\fB--hmmbuild-program\fP PATH
set the hmmbuild program. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'hmmbuild'.

.TP
\fB--hmmsearch-evalue-threshold\fP X
set the e-value threshold for HMM searches. Can be specified in a floating point or an exponential number. Defaults to 10e-5.

\fB--hmmsearch-program\fP
set the hmmsearch program. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'hmmsearch'.

.TP
\fB--hmmsearch-score-threshold\fP X
set the score threshold for HMM searches. Defaults to 10.

.TP
\fB--hmmsearchoutdir\fP DIR
set the output directory for HMM result files. Will be created if it does not exist.

.TP
\fB--input-file\fP FILE
set the input file. Required for \fIorthograph-analyzer\fP.

.TP
\fB-le\fP, \fB--list-ests\fP
list a summary of all est data present in the database.

.TP
\fB-lo\fP, \fB--list-ogs\fP
print a list of all OGS present in the database.

.TP
\fB-ls\fP, \fB--list-sets\fP
print a list of ortholog sets present in the database.

.TP
\fB-lt\fP, \fB--list-taxa\fP
print a list of taxa present in the database.

.TP
\fB--load-ogs-nucleotide\fP FILE
load the nucleotide OGS in FILE into the database. Available for \fIorthograph-manager\fP. If called without further options, this action will interactively query the user for information on the OGS to be loaded.

.TP
\fB--load-ogs-peptide\fP FILE
load the peptide OGS in FILE into the database. Available for \fIorthograph-manager\fP. If called without further options, this action will interactively query the user for information on the OGS to be loaded.

.TP
\fB--logfile\fP FILE
set the path to the log file. Defaults to 'orthograph-XXXXXXXX' resp. 'report-XXXXXXXX' in the log directory, where XXXXXXXX is a date string.

.TP
\fB--makeblastdb-program\fP PATH
set the makeblastdb program. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'makeblastdb'.

.TP
\fB--max-blast-searches\fP N
set the maximum number of BLAST searches for each COG. This is basically a way to limit the number of HMM hits being processed further. Defaults to 50.

.TP
\fB--mysql-database\fP DATABASE
set the MySQL database. If you use the MySQL backend, this option must be set.

.TP
\fB--mysql-password\fP PASSWORD
set the MySQL database password. If you use the MySQL backend, this option must be set. If you are concerned about security issues, you should not set this on the command line, but in your config file.

.TP
\fB--mysql-server\fP SERVER
set the MySQL database server. If you use the MySQL backend, this option must be set.

.TP
\fB--mysql-timeout\fP N
set the timeout for MySQL queries. If a query fails, Orthograph will wait this amount of seconds before retrying.

.TP
\fB--mysql-username\fP NAME
set the MySQL username. If you use the MySQL backend, this option must be set.

.TP
\fB--no-frameshift-correction\fP
turn off frameshift correction using Exonerate. This way, the transcripts are guaranteed to be orthologous, but not that they correspond on amino acid and nucleotide leve.

.TP
\fB--ntoutdir\fP DIR
set the output directory for nucleotide sequences to DIR. Will be created if it does not exist.

.TP
\fB--num-threads\fP N
set the number of parallel threads for the programs that support this (hmmbuild, hmmsearch, blastp). Set this to a higher number to speed up searches on a multicore system. Defaults to 1.

.TP
\fB--ogs-version\fP VERSION
set the version for the OGS you are loading with --load-ogs-nucleotide or --load-ogs-peptide. May be an arbitrary string or number, enclose in quotes if it contains whitespace.

.TP
\fB--ogs-taxon-name\fP NAME
set the version for the OGS you are loading with --load-ogs-nucleotide or --load-ogs-peptide. May be an arbitrary string, enclose in quotes if it contains whitespace.

.TP
\fB--orf-overlap-minimum\fP F
set the ORF overlap percentage threshold to F. May be a floating-point number between 0 and 1. This is the minimum percentage of the orthologous region that an ORF must cover. Defaults to 0.5, set this to a lower value to make searches more relaxed.

.TP
\fB--ortholog-set\fP SET
set the ortholog set to SET. Available for \fIorthograph-analyzer\fP and \fIorthograph-reporter\fP. Must be the same for both. Uses the ortholog set SET for analyses. Do not specify the path to the OrthoDB file here, but the name you gave the set in the database.

.TP
\fB--output-directory\fP DIR
set the output directory to DIR. Will be created if it does not exist. Defaults to the current directory.

.TP
\fB-o\fP, \fB--overwrite\fP
overwrite existing ortholog set data in the database if the set already exists. This will most likely cause data disintegration, use only if you know what you are doing.

.TP
\fB--prepare\fP
prepare the database for analysis. This will remove existing result tables and (re-)create them. Available for \fIorthograph-analyzer\fP.

.TP
\fB-q\fP, \fB--quiet\fP
be quiet. Orthograph will not report anything but the most important information.

.TP
\fB--reference-taxa\fP LIST,OF,REFTAXA
specify a comma-separated list of reference taxon \fIshorthands\fP that are considered for the reciprocal search. In the config file, there may be whitespace, but not on the command line, for obvious reasons. Defaults to all taxa in your ortholog set.

.TP
\fB--sets-dir\fP DIR
set the ortholog set directory to DIR. This will contain the HMM files and the BLAST database for each set. Will be created if it does not exist. Defaults to 'sets' in the current directory.

.TP
\fB--soft-threshold\fP N
set the so-called soft threshold to N, the number of reciprocal hits that may not be part of the COG before a transcript is rejected. Defaults to 5.

.TP
\fB--species-name\fP NAME
set NAME for the species being analyzed. Available for \fIorthograph-analyzer\fP.

.TP
\fB--sqlite-database\fP FILE
set the SQLite database FILE. Change this if you want to place your database somewhere else. Defaults to 'orthograph.sqlite' in the current directory.

.TP
\fB--sqlite-program\fP PATH
set the sqlite program. For some operations, Orthograph uses the sqlite program, so it must be present. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'sqlite3'.

.TP
\fB--strict-search\fP
turns on strict behaviour. \fIAll\fP reference taxa you specified (or all in the set, if you did not specify any) must be hit for a transcript to be considered orthologous. This is \fImuch\fP more conservative.

.TP
\fB--substitute-u-with\fP X
set the substitution character for selenocysteine (U) to X. This is used before BLAST database creation because BLAST does not like Us in amino acid sequences. May be a single character. Defaults to 'X'.

.TP
\fB--temp-dir\fP DIR
set the temporary directory to DIR. Temporary files will be placed here. Defaults to '/tmp'.

.TP
\fB--translate-program\fP PATH
set the fastatranslate program, which is part of the Exonerate package. Used for translating the nucleotide transcripts into all six possible reading frames before analysis. Must be the complete path if the location is not in the $PATH. You can also specify options, but the argument needs to be enclosed in quotes then. Defaults to 'fastatranslate'.

.TP
\fB-v\fP, \fB--verbose\fP
be verbose. Report more information about what Orthograph is doing. Available for all Orthograph tools.


.PP
.SH FILES
.nf
orthograph-manager
orthograph-analyzer
orthograph-reporter
orthograph.conf

.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Malte Petersen.

.PP
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to mptrsen at uni-bonn.de
Orthograph home page: <http://github.com/mptrsen/Orthograph/>

.COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2014 Malte Petersen

